and way Gulf noon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference I'm very
pleased to be joined by Sir Ian Diamond
the UK's national statistician from the
ONS and also by dr. Jenny Harry's deputy
chief medical officer the latest data
from our Cobra coronavirus data file
shows that as of today there have now
been 1 million five hundred and thirty
four thousand five hundred and thirty
three tests for coronavirus across the
UK that includes eighty six thousand
five hundred and eighty three tests
carried out yesterday two hundred and
six thousand seven hundred and fifteen
people have tested positive that's an
increase of five thousand six hundred
and fourteen cases since yesterday those
who tested positive very sadly thirty
thousand six hundred and fifteen people
have now died and my deepest condolences
go out to anyone who's lost a loved one
throughout this pandemic three weeks ago
before the easter bank holiday weekend i
sat out five tests for the UK to move on
to the next phase in this pandemic then
just as now they were calls to ease up
on the restrictions but as the science
made clear we couldn't responsibly do
that in fact the advice from the group
of scientific experts aged who advised
the government made it very clear that
there weren't any changes at all that we
could confidently take without risking a
second peak in this virus that's why we
asked the public to keep going we
weren't done yet we said stick to the
plan and the British public kept going
people stuck to the rules that meant
working from home it meant worries about
money it meant adjusting to home
schooling time apart from family and
friends and just not doing many of the
things that we all enjoy in life at the
same time there's been a lot of people
who despite their own personal
sacrifices have gone the extra mile they
volunteered to support the elderly and
the vulnerable in their community
what who have been shielded themselves
away from the virus and each Thursday of
course we now come together to applaud
NHS staff and the carers the people who
just kept going
to keep our country going and because of
that monumental effort we've now passed
the peak of the virus the NHS hasn't
been overwhelmed we haven't seen
hospital wards overwhelmed with patients
people left without hospital beds people
left with out the ventilators that can
mean the difference between life and
death
now I know the tragic death toll in this
country and around the world has been
sobering for all of us and they have
been real challenges in this country
with PPE with care homes but in this
first stage of the fight against kovat
19 through this national team effort
we've prevented the number of deaths
rising to even higher levels and we've
ensured critically that the NHS had the
capacity to cope today cabinet was
updated on sages advice on the progress
that we've made today and as a result of
the social distancing measures that we
put in place the are level which
signifies the rate of infection is now
between noir point five and nine point
nine the overall number of new cases has
been steadily falling and the rate of
deaths is also steadily steadily falling
now just to be clear about what all of
this means in practice the virus is not
beaten yet it remains deadly and
infectious and we're working very hard
right across government and with local
government to bring it down in areas of
concern
like in care homes and I'm confident we
can do it and we will do it but because
we held firm three weeks ago we are now
in a position to start think about the
next phase in this pandemic so this
weekend the Prime Minister will set out
the next steps which we can responsibly
take over the following weeks guided by
the scientific advice and mindful as
we've said right from there the word go
off taking the right decisions at the
right time now we can start setting out
how we will live and work whilst
maintaining the necessary social
distancing rules we can also be clear
about those mess measures which are
still necessary to prevent a second peak
the Prime Minister has been directing
ministers and our teams of officials
right across government
to carefully develop a roadmap for the
next phase
it contains appropriate measures to be
taken at appropriate milestones subject
to very clear conditions and there will
be detailed guidance to help inform
advise and reassure the public
businesses and other organizations to
get this right we have set milestones
some changes can confidently be
introduced more quickly than others some
of those other ones will take longer to
introduce and it's important to say this
at each point along the way when we take
these decisions they'll be based on the
five tests and the scientific advice
that we receive and as I set out in the
fifth of our five tests when I spoke
here at this lectern on the 16th of
April the point at we will at the point
at which we make even the smallest of
changes to the current guidance will be
a point of maximum risk if people
abandon the social distancing if we
forget the sacrifices that were made to
get us through the peak to get us to
this point the virus will grow again at
an exponential rate that would lead to a
second peak which would threaten the NHS
it would trigger another lockdown which
would prolong the economic pain and
we're determined to keep it temporary to
keep it as short as possible so we kept
the current measures in place for this
long precisely so that we can bounce
back with vigor and energy as soon as
possible as soon as it is responsible to
start looking at the second phase and
because of that our next steps will be
sure-footed and sustainable any changes
that we make will be carefully monitored
if people don't follow the rules or if
we see that the our level goes back up
we will tighten the restrictions again
and we will always retain the option to
do so that way we can safeguard public
health and we can also safeguard the
economy in a sustainable way
so having prepared carefully based on
the updated advice from Sage this
weekend the prime minister will set out
the roadmap for the next phase along
with the conditions for reaching each
milestone mark each milestone that way
we can provide the country with a better
understanding
of what lies ahead we can offer
reassurance that we will adjust the
restrictions to the minimum necessary to
prevent a second spike in the virus and
we can give people the confidence that
we're doing it in a way that will
protect life and preserve our way of
life and all that note I'll hand over to
Jenny to present the data on the latest
science thank you thank you so this is
just a very quick reminder of what we're
all working to achieve and the five
tests that the first secretaries just
mentioned for adjusting the lockdown and
the sides that all go through now that
show how we're progressing towards that
and the first thing here really is to
reinforce the action that people have
taken so could you revert the slide
thank you
just to show how much people have been
following those social distancing rules
and really helping to bring the rate of
infection down but also to be protecting
each other so the number of people
avoiding contact with vulnerable people
of adults 92 percent of avoided contact
with all drove on rural people in the
last seven days so really looking out
for each other and in general 82 percent
have not left their home or only left
their home for all the reasons that we
know that you should and that has
reflected now in much reduced our rate
and the opportunities that we have going
forward carefully to be adjusting the
measures I think the other interesting
thing looking forward is 44% of adults
in employment have now said they've been
working from home at some time in the
last week significantly changed from the
twelfth percent at the same time last
year and that helps the social
distancing but I think it also perhaps
helps people recognize other
opportunities for how they can work in
the future next I think
so here we see the daily tests which
have increased so the test yesterday or
rather up to nine o'clock this morning
carried out were eighty six and a half
thousand there has been a little bit of
a technical hitch in the lab over the
weekend but that's now starting to rise
again and we will see in the following
slides how that translates through to
detection of disease next time please
and here we have on this slide so the
blue pillar there is the NHS swab
testing the rates of case detection are
coming down these are primarily within
healthcare settings in hospitals but the
orange pillars on on the top there
represents the increased capacity and
numbers of tests that are being carried
out and obviously we hope overall that
our case numbers will come down but in
this intervening period while testing is
increasing then we expect those orange
pillars to grow so we will have
increased case detection but we want to
watch the the blue pillars coming down
as they are now next slide please
and this slide which we've seen before
but I think with some trepidation at the
top of those Peaks we can now see that
just about all regions have come right
back down to relatively low levels
compared with a peak of course I say
relatively that for the number of people
in hospitals that still represents a
huge work load for NHS frontline staff
but it does show a decrease of 16% over
the last week next slide please
and again reflected from that last slide
is the use of critical care beds at one
time there was obviously concerned that
with the rising epidemic we would have
sufficient capacity there was a plan to
manage that and now less than a third of
critical care beds are occupied by Kovic
impatience and that's been decreasing
right across the UK over the last two
weeks and here we have the seven-day
rolling average now obviously sitting
behind this our recorded deaths none of
which we would wish to be there but in
that on the positive side of that is the
fact that we concede the rise in the
epidemic peak and the subsequent later
deaths there were 539 deaths in all
settings following in the last period
but the seven-day rolling average now is
is a midweek one which is the most
robust figure we can see the variation
over the weekend periods in that slide
and this is the lowest I think that has
been we've seen since the end of March
again really importantly that all the
social distancing measures all the
things that we've been doing we need to
keep doing to maintain that gradual
decline in the line next slide please
and then finally just a quick comparison
it's important that we compare data
internationally and this is global death
comparison but as we've mentioned
frequently there are variations in how
different countries measure those deaths
and these are numbers rather than rates
thank you Jenny thank you very much I
think we've got a string of questions
and first of all Thomas from London to
lift any lockdown measures considering
that our track and trace system is not
yet operational and there are
comparatively slow decline in daily
deaths means that we have little margin
for error how safe is it to lift any lot
to me well Thomas thank you very much
for that question I think you've nailed
it we we've got the latest data from
Sage we have come through the peat but
it is a very delicate and as I said
before a very dangerous moment so we do
need to proceed with caution and the
prime minister is going to set out a
road map and that will not just include
the kinds of things that we're looking
at doing but the criteria to make sure
that we make sure footed steps and we
can monitor very carefully any changes
or incrementally we make
to make sure that we don't see the virus
get back its grip on this country and
see the our rate as it's been explained
here in this afternoon go back up so yes
there's an opportunity to move to the
second phase and start and looking
towards that but it has to be done very
carefully subject to strict conditions
with strict monitoring to make sure that
we do it in a controlled and sustainable
way thank you for your question I think
we've got one from Brandon from
Warrington now Brandon asks how does the
government intend to control ongoing
outbreaks in prisons particularly in
terms of balancing the rights of
prisoners against the health and safety
of prison staff and their families which
is being put at significant risk I have
to say I think the prison system
and all of those prison officers have
done an incredible job we've of course
there was concern around Kovac 19 in
prisons both for staff but also for
offenders we've got a plan in place
which is meant that that hasn't become a
major issue but we take nothing for
granted we're not complacent about it
for a moment I spoke to the Justice
Secretary this week we're monitoring it
very carefully but actually we're
confident that we have a situation under
control I think we're gonna move over to
the media now Laura Kunz burg from the
BBC
you're on mute Laurie I don't know
that's at your end or that should be
okay now can you hear me well done that
way that's not your quota of questions
go okay much can you just confirm one
point of fact are you renewing the
restrictions today as you have to do
under the legislation and Nicola
Sturgeon has said it's potentially
catastrophic to move away from the stay
at home message given that the disease
is still prevalent in many parts of the
country are you really sure that it is
safe to lift any of the restrictions
however a gradual rolling down the
lockdown
rolling back the lockdown might be and
if I could ask dr. Harris um you said
that the are is somewhere between 0.5
and 0.9 can you tell people exactly what
the are level is in different parts of
the country given that it's such a key
factor in how the decisions all the way
thanks Laura well first of all I think
whether you're in London Edinburgh
Cardiff or Belfast as we enter another
long bank holiday weekend I think the
message is very clear follow the
guidance to answer a question there is
no change today in the guidance or in
the rules but as I've also explained the
Prime Minister will set out a road map
on Sunday and of course we are locked in
to the closest cooperation collaboration
with the devolved administration's
through Cobra but also the Prime
Minister spoke to the first ministers
today he reiterated our commitment to
continuing a uk-wide approach to
tackling the pandemic and even if
different parts may move at slightly
different speeds but I think the key
thing is that those decisions are made
based on the science and the
circumstances for each nation you want
to comment on the other point that was
raised the question that was asked is
what is the R around the UK and clearly
there is some variation and we are
absolutely bait working with some
fantastic estimates that are done by our
modelling community and I think that the
consensus is that it is below 1
everywhere lowest probably in London
but certainly some variation across the
different regions would you like a
question and yeah can I just on that on
that point is it is it possible to give
us those exact numbers but also just to
you foreign secretary you stood there at
that same elector and time after time
and said that it would be wrong to talk
about lifting any kind of restrictions
because you might give people the wrong
impression yeah isn't that what exactly
what the government risks doing now
ahead of what looks like being a very
sunny bank holiday weekend when many
people are just desperate to get out of
it
first of all I've said very clearly some
very have to say again that there's no
change in the rules today what the Prime
Minister will do is set out on Sunday a
road map that can look to the future and
explain what steps will be taken at what
moment in time and critically the
evidence that will back it up we've
always said consistently from the outset
we've got to take the right decisions at
the right moment in time guided by the
evidence that is consistently what we've
said from the outset and that approach
is continuing there's anything else you
can say on the on no I think I mean I'm
quite happy to produce them later but we
don't have them right in front of me now
there were thanks very much
Libby you winder from the ITV yes hello
foreign secretary FiOS very much this
afternoon one of your advisors professor
John Edmunds told MPs that transmission
in the community was no longer a problem
he suggested that the epidemic was now
centered on hospitals and care homes do
you accept that the government blundered
in not focusing on these particularly
vulnerable areas earlier and that's why
the lockdown is having to go on for so
long for the rest of us well first of
all it's good news that the are level
I've come down overall that's because of
the measures we put in place because
when I stood here before the East about
holiday we said you've got to stick to
our guns here and frankly because of the
efforts of the public in following that
guidance and indeed the brilliant
essential workers in the NHS care homes
and otherwise we have definitely got a
challenge in care homes the CQC data
that came out I think yesterday show
that overall in care homes the number of
deaths was down by over three hundreds
on the last week so that's positive but
there is still a very significant issue
in Karen's Jenny and I were in a
Crosswhite hall meeting yesterday we're
looking at exactly how we ramped up
every bit of what we need to do around
the social distancing in care homes the
open flow of people into care homes the
PPE the testing to make sure we bear
down on this problem and you're right as
well there's also an issue in hospitals
so it's good news that overall that
we've got control across the country but
of course as we've always said we've got
to make sure that we see consistent
Falls and the death rate and the
infection rate across all settings and
that's how we will continue with our
approach Redmon's would also have said
and I would certainly say that in early
March as we started to move towards the
policies that the public have been so
wonderful in taking place we were
doubling the size of the epidemic in
every three days and I think if you look
at the graph that dr. Harry showed
earlier you see a very steep upward
curve the fact that it is coming down
now is because I believe of the success
that L&S has been measuring as many
other people of the lockdown measures
maybe we'd like to follow up on any of
that yes on another topic essentially
there is a huge amount of data now
suggesting that black adults in this
country are particularly vulnerable
perhaps the death rate is something like
four times that for the equivalent
people of a white ethnicity the
government said it's looking into it are
you actually going to do something about
it to protect for example frontline
workers from these ethnic groups well
look first of all we're very concerned
about it it's something we take very
seriously we're learning more about this
virus all the time because it's new and
we've asked public health England to
look very carefully at all of the
implications and and how it is affecting
different communities but particularly
the
any community and once we've got the
advice back from them we'll know what
interventions can sensibly he be made
and that's the way we would begin as
we've said throughout we need the
scientific evidence to back up any
policy decisions that we would want to
make in that front Thank You Libby Beth
Rigby from Sky News thank you so a
secular state the prime minister said in
the Commons yesterday that there will be
changes so the lockdown from Monday a
millions of people would have read that
that will include more outdoor exercise
and sunbathing and yet today you're
saying that they must adhere to the
lockdown ahead of a statement on Sunday
as we go into this sunny bank holiday
weekend can you see how the public will
find this really confusing do we
sunbathe on Monday but not on Sunday and
just to follow up on Libby's question
should the AME people now be shielding
as they are potentially more vulnerable
and at greater risk of catching a dime
from coronavirus well in relation to the
BME question we'll take decisions as a
policy makers when we've got clear
advice from phe on the causes and the
implications and what we could
responsibly do I think that's the
responsible thing for ministers to do
and in relation to any next changes or
any net the second phase that we're
going to be guided by the evidence we've
had updated evidence from Sage there's
further evidence it is coming through
and we obviously have to take those
decisions at the right moment in time
based on that evidence and I you know
whatever has been reported in the
newspapers is not a reliable guide to
either the evidence that we're getting
or the policy decisions that we'll be
taking and so that's why it's very
important that Prime Minister on Sunday
will set out a roadmap and I think it's
safe to say that any changes in the
short term will be modest small
incremental and very carefully monitored
and as of now there is no changes but
the key thing is that we want to give a
response in a responsible and a
sure-footed way a sense of the roadmap
ahead coupled with the milestones and
the
ditions so that people have the
reassurance and the confidence yes that
will protect life and preserve our way
of life but that we're doing it in a
responsible way and of course if we find
and this is very important at this stage
and the virus not just for the UK but
for others at the similar stage having
come through the peak if we find in the
future that there the our level goes
back up or that we find that people
aren't following the rules we must have
the ability then to put back measures in
place and that is the way we can
responsibly go through this stage and
transition into a second phase but as
we've always said that we're going to
take the right decisions at the right
time and so for the moment it is really
important particularly as people look
towards a warm back holiday weekend that
we continue to follow the guidance in
place at this time with just just
thanked given given that we're going
into the bank holiday and you are
formally rolling over the lock down
isn't it unhelpful if the prime minister
says on Wednesday that he doesn't he
wants to roll it that there might be
changes on Monday and then he doesn't
turn up today to tell the British public
what those changes might be ahead of the
bank holiday sorry Beth that's simply
just not the case and I've set out what
we're doing with explaining that the
Prime Minister on Sunday when we
compiled all the evidence and we can do
so in a responsible sure-footed fashion
will set out the roadmap ahead any
measures that will be taken next week
will be relatively modest incremental
steps to carefully monitored subject to
all of the qualifications that we've
already set but we will set out a road
map with milestones maximum
conditionality on that so that we can
make sure we take short footage steps so
I know you people desperate to know what
he's going to say on Sunday and but I'm
not going to jump the gun we've always
said we'll take the right decisions at
the right moment thank you very much
Beth Chris Mike from The Times thank you
a couple of things firstly temperature
testing is not something you've done
before because we've missed cases it's
not a panacea but in places like South
Korea it's a regular part of being
allowed him to airports workplaces
restaurants and it's been reported that
we look up here here so is that the next
lesson
learn from Asia and the newbies question
I mean professor Edmunds also said this
afternoon there are about 20,000 new
infections of great advice every day at
the moment and canal Surrey and he's
obviously studying this if he agrees and
if not what his estimate is first
secretary you put quite a lot worried
estimate on our veterans also say it was
very much the higher end of that just
below one and indeed higher than it was
two weeks ago largely because of what's
happening in hospitals and care homes so
is that a concern and how much is that
delaying how much we can lose
illustrations quickly managed to squeeze
in three questions they're very craftily
done so in relation to the arm and all
I've done is articulate the are level
and the range that was explained to us
in relation to any potential
restrictions at the border coming into
this country those will be announced in
due course and sensible way I'm not sure
I think the evidence so far has always
been that temperature test an optically
effective way of proceeding but I think
the critical thing and we've taken
advise on border measures and I've asked
consistently this question to semo's
deputy cm O's chief scientific advisors
and all the other scientists and I think
the evidence suggests that you would
once you've got the there's not much
point in taking those measures until the
our level is down below a certain point
but as you start to get control of it
what you don't want is the virus
receding in the UK the source of that
being from abroad and that is the point
at which you would want to consider
restrictions or monitoring at the at the
border I don't know I think also you
were referring to potential use in other
environments so restaurants and things
like that which i think is a routine
part of South Korean working I mean I
think there is a strong reassurance
mechanism for the public but as I've
said previously if you have a disease
and it has an incubation period of say
up to 14 days the likelihood of finding
somebody at the points where they have a
temperature and you have a reliable bit
of kit so most thermal scanners will be
distracted if you like from
environmental colour
density and temperatures as well so
there's you need a reliable bit of kit
but even then your chance of picking
somebody up is very small but but it can
have a reassurance mechanism I think and
the other really important thing in
relation to Kovac 19 is a sizeable
proportion up to about a third of people
do not have a temperature at
presentation they may have it variably
through the illness or they don't have
it they come with we're learning more as
we go through about the symptoms and
signs that people have so I don't think
we could expect that we want to catch
people if you like in the early phase of
the disease where they're most likely to
transmit and not all of them will have
the temperature it's really you you
asked the question about whether I
agreed with professor Edmunds and I
think we're incredibly lucky in this
country to have mathematicians of the
quality of Professor Edmunds and the
others in the various teams around the
UK who are making those estimates and
they are based on new data every time
they make two estimates a week and I
think I would personally support them
over the next few weeks they will be
getting extra data through a very large
study that the ONS is doing together
with the University of Oxford the
University of Manchester and Wellcome
Trust which will provide if you like
direct community evidence both on the
number infected any particular time
number of people infected a particular
time and also the number of people who
have had at some stage the the virus and
therefore I have an antibody to it and
those data as they become available and
a weekly basis over the next while will
inform those numbers even more but to
answer your question straight I'm very
happy with those numbers Chris did you
ever follow up maybe just limit yourself
to the one yeah I mean the fact that
he's higher than it was two weeks ago is
that delaying what we can do and doesn't
mean we have to wait for the outbreak
and care homes to be under control well
I probably should defer not not sure I
mean the range
sorry far away they are the resident
saying is right that are has probably
gone up just a little bit from his last
estimates and that is driven by the
epidemic in care homes he would say and
I would not dimmer from that that gives
us a real challenge to reduce the
epidemic in care homes and it's one that
I think over the next few weeks from
what I see happening I think will happen
it's important to recognize that the our
number itself is only relevant if you
look also at the context of the
prevalence and I think we need to bring
the two together properly
to understand where we are let me just
give you an example in for secretary if
you wouldn't mind me being technical for
a minute please do if you imagine a
situation where we have the prevalence
at 4.40 even put five zeros one so in
other words tiny tiny numbers and that
is the same every week then the R would
be one because it's flatlining and that
is so important that we always think
about R in the context of the prevalence
and that's why I think at the moment
yeah we need certainly to get on top of
the epidemic in the care homes and in
hospitals I know dr. Harris would be
able to comment there's an awful lot of
work going on in those arenas but I do
think also that in the community we have
things relatively low at the moment so
overall that our level is down but
there's obviously clearly a challenge
that remains in care homes although
again I just point to the CQC data which
shows that the number of deaths is down
over three hundred on this time last
week but the reality is our top focus is
on the hospital infections and on the
care home settings we've got a very
robust and rigorous plan to really drive
down the infection rate in those two
settings over the next month and we're
confident we can deliver on that journey
I don't know anything your dad or me and
well just to reinforce what you're
saying I think so and there are a number
of things that you can do to try and
support care homes and
put residents in them and I think we
need to focus equally not just on the
residents but on the staff as well
because these are quite closed
communities if you like and as we've
been talking about the are in the
community where everybody has done so
well to bring that number down
but of course workers who are working in
care and health settings also are part
of their local communities so we need to
make sure that we address infection
prevention and control measures and
really make them robust we test now we
have always been testing for outbreaks
but I think we're getting new
information coming through about
asymptomatic infection and how that
particularly presents in the elderly
excuse me and of course those are the
people who are probably most at risk so
using that new evidence increased
testing and increased focus and also new
support coming in from NHS England in in
terms of giving clinical support to our
care homes that I think that focus will
be we see well we've seen some positive
signs already he's understood that will
continue the single biggest challenge
we've got cares is the Edmund flow of
people in and out of them particularly
when they're that they're not showing
signs of having the virus so at least
that's something we can control and
really focus on with laser-like
precision and that's what we'll do Chris
thanks very much makes the whole from
the Express Thank You Colin secretary to
dr. Harris what's the latest medical
thinking about the impact of warm
weather on the virus is there any danger
that any lockdown restrictions their
ease over the summer months may have to
be reimpose in the in the autumn because
of seasonal variations and foreign
secretary a question about the
government's contract contact tracing
app people who download this app face
being asked to go into isolation
possibly multiple times if they come
into contact with people who've reported
symptoms will they be entitled to sick
pay or will their employers be entitled
to any compensation if they're forced to
go into isolation again and again well
just on that I've been jumping it got a
little bit on the guidance but the key
thing is that
it will be a liberating thing for people
because an indeed for the country as a
whole because it will allow people who
might have the symptoms to be clear that
they don't have coronavirus and there
will not be subject to all of those
restrictions and that's the most
important thing and it will actually
allow people to get out of the isolation
measures earlier than otherwise would be
the case Jenny typically the issue about
whether I think obviously it was it's a
new virus and we are still learning
about it and so I would like to leave
the evidence base open a little bit but
when we first learned about it of course
if we look at something like seasonal
flu there was a possibility that it
might behave in the same way and in that
way we might imagine that in the warmer
weather now we would see a decline but
if you look around the world we're
seeing epidemics in warm and cool the
climate so I think probably not a lot of
evidence there but your point about
lockdown and the winter is a really
important one I don't think it
particularly relates to lockdown but it
does relate very much to active work now
first in pushing as we push and we're
more successful in pushing that peak
forward which we've seen we definitely
don't want a second peak and we don't
want it in the winter because people
will be suffering from other winter
infections so there will be increasingly
debilitated so all the work that's
ongoing now we must do safely as the
first secretary has said but equally
it's probably a good place for me as a
public health doctor to advertise all go
and get your flu jobs this year really
really important that people maintain
their health and take every preventative
measures that they can thanks Jenny
Mesa did you have any follow-up set no
that's just fine thank you brilliant
good to speak to Gemma crew from PA
final question thank you and good
afternoon and so we've heard about
20,000 people a day are still being
affected on Saturday my colleague asked
whether you know if where people are
contracting the virus and I believe you
said you have the data but not to hand
could we ask again are people picking it
up in host in supermarkets public
transport or is it predominantly care
homes and hospitals surely this is quite
a vital part of the lockdown easing
decision-making process well let there
in and jenny talked about the wider
statistical picture but as has already
been explained the evidence that's been
provided to us is that overall we've got
the rate of infection down across the
country and particularly the community
the two areas where there are specific
concerns are care homes and hospital
infections and we have very clear
conservative plan covers everything from
cohorting and the social distancing
through to testing and PPE so we we're
not complacent for a moment in those two
settings but we do have a plan that
we're delivering to to bring it right
down yes I mean to reinforce that I
think that's where our focus of
attention is going forward and where we
think cases are potentially going to be
at the higher end whilst those in the
community are dropping off it's very
difficult to say precisely where an
individual caught their disease because
we're exposed to mother you we have
multiple exposures all the time and it's
a time of pandemic when an infection is
fairly widespread it's difficult to
pinpoint that we can look in some ways
so for example looking at different
transmissions in a chain of transmission
and seeing where the most risks are and
actually when we do that most of the
transmissions are at home so the home
environment is is a very strong
environment for finding linked cases but
equally there's some really good
genomics work ongoing at the moment
which will give us a really good data I
think going forward to understand where
the chains of transmission are and
actually where they came into the
country from one thing if I may all the
data that we are looking at shows the
success of social distancing and if I
make the personal view then I do believe
that social distancing and maintaining
it over the next few weeks is going to
be central to continuing to reducing the
epidemic Jared did you want a
supplementary last question yeah thank
you can I just ask and we said maybe to
go about the problem being the ebb and
flow of people into care homes so
doesn't that underlying the need to
probably get testing back up to a
hundred thousand a day and can I ask if
you're considering
testing people relatives that might be
wanting to visit loved ones before they
go into care homes so I think the the
challenge and and it's actually similar
in hospital settings and care homes is
people who are not showing symptoms but
who have coronavirus passing on and the
speed at which we can detect that
testing is part of that but also and
it's the movement of people in and out
of those settings which is fueling that
transmission so they're both parts of
that problem there's not a silver bullet
here it's about putting all the
different bits the jigsaw to together
and having a strategic holistic approach
and we're confident now we've got enough
information we got the data and we've
got the plan in place now to really
drive down in fixing the infection rates
in hospitals but also in care homes
Gemma thank you very much and that
brings an end to this press conference
thank you all very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC Dorko dot UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News